Welcome to this special report.
No doubt you've been hearing on the news about the tremendous natural disasters that have
been affecting a whole region of our Earth.
We know you're concerned about our brothers and sisters in these areas.
And so we wanted to provide you with this update as to the situation of our brothers in
Mexico, the Caribbean, and the United States.
This is the time of the end.
Matthew 24-7 indicates that in the last days, there will be earthquakes in one place
after another.
Jesus said that we should expect to see this, so we are not surprised that we are seeing
an increasing number of earthquakes and other natural disasters in the world.
However, we want to do everything possible to provide our brothers and sisters with the
relief aid that they need.
According to Acts chapter 11 and verse 29, the disciples determined to send relief to
their brothers who were experiencing famine.
In this program, we will give you an update on how Jehovah's modern-day organization
is following this scriptural pattern and responding to the needs of our brothers in
hard-hit areas.
We will interview brothers from three different branch offices, as well as a representative
of the coordinators' committee.
Several of these brothers have just visited the disaster areas and they have important
information for us.
We'll begin by going to Mexico, where we have brother Ed Bunn, who serves on the Central
America Branch Committee live with us.
Welcome, Ed.
It's very good to see you.
Tell us a little bit about what's happening in Mexico.
How are our brothers doing?
Yes, Mark.
It's very nice to be able to speak with you, too.
You know our brothers here in the past four or five weeks have felt the force of a tropical
storm, two hurricanes, and two very devastating earthquakes.
The first earthquake was an 8.2 magnitude quake on September the 7th, and the second was
a 7.1 magnitude earthquake on September 19th.
The first earthquake affected the areas, the states of Chiapas and Wahaka.
That's where we have our largest concentration of Jehovah's Witnesses and Kingdom Halls.
And in just a matter of minutes, these areas were completely devastated.
Over 800 of our brothers' homes were either destroyed or they were suffered major damage.
Many people in these two states were trapped under their homes when they collapsed on them.
And three of our brothers also lost their lives.
The second earthquake occurred here in Mexico City and in the states of Puebla and in Morelos.
And you know, Mark, we still don't have a complete figure or picture to help us to understand
the complete impact that this earthquake has had and continues to have on our brothers.
But we do know that they're being well cared for.
Well, Ed, we're very, very sorry to hear about our brothers and especially the loss
of life, but it's encouraging to know that the Central America Branch Committee is right
on top of the situation and that you're getting involved to help our brothers.
Can you tell us a little bit more about what's happening with regard to the relief?
Well, because the two earthquakes occurred just within like 12 days of one another
and the destruction is so widespread and the needs of the brothers are so varied.
Our branch committee has formed a special relief committees to cover the four affected areas.
But even before the brothers were able to gather up their reports and send them here to the branch,
they were already helping one another.
The circuit overseers, the elders, the members of the disaster committees were doing all that they could
to be able to help the brothers and provide for their needs.
They wanted to comfort the brothers.
They wanted to provide for them whatever they needed.
They wanted to make certainly a carry on as they could with their spiritual routines.
And so they took the initiative to help our brothers and they wanted to assure the brothers
that they weren't going to have to face this adversity alone.
Some of the brothers who had lost their own homes made certain that their families were okay
and then they set out to be able to account for the other brothers in the congregation
to take care of these brothers.
Others who weren't so adversely affected, well, they gathered up food and water.
They went out and bought food, water, blankets, other provisions.
And they took them to where the brothers were more needy.
Often this was done with a certain risk to their own lives
because many of the buildings were collapsing in these areas.
But our brothers felt that they were not alone.
The brothers felt that they were being cared for.
And we feel that that was really the direction of Jehovah's spirit over them.
Since the earthquakes, they've continued to be repeated aftershocks, thousands of them.
And this, of course, puts in jeopardy the homes and the buildings that have already been damaged.
It obligates people to continue to sleep out in the open.
It makes people fear for maybe even a greater earthquake that will be coming.
But despite all of this, our brothers are showing that they love one another.
They love Jehovah.
They have strong faith and confidence in Jehovah.
And for us here in the branch, it's just a matter of being able to see.
They really have love that is in action.
You know, that is so heartwarming for us to hear this about how our brothers
are helping each other and coming to their aid.
You know, it's what we feel we would do if we were there.
But it just warms our hearts to hear about this.
Ed, is there been something that you could share with us that perhaps is especially warmed your heart or has been especially encouraging for you?
Well, Mark, one very moving experience had to do with one of our brothers
who was serving on one of the relief committees.
And he was visiting the brothers who, in his area,
who had been affected by the earthquake.
He visited one brother who had just lost his new, very modern home.
And now was living in a little shack that he had built on his property.
A little shack made out of bamboo and a tin roof.
The brother when he approached our brother who was living there in his little shack with his family,
he asked how he was doing and then he told them that he was happy to see that he was alive and that he was safe.
And then he asked the brother, and how are you two daughters?
And the brother replied, well, they're both safe and alive.
And so our visiting brother said to him, well, how thankful you can feel to know that your daughters are safe and alive.
You know, I just lost my little two-year-old daughter from an illness.
It's brought great grief to me and to my wife.
But we are able to overcome this grief because we've decided to increase our service to Jehovah.
And just be able to now go out and visit the brothers who are victims of the earthquake.
This is being so encouraging to me.
And our brother there, when he heard this expression, his eyes filled with tears.
And he said he was determined now that he was going to regain his spiritual routine.
There are many innumerable experiences on behalf of our brothers, but it shows their confidence in their in Jehovah and their love for one another.
And this is something that we are able to experience even here in Bethel.
It shows us that what Jehovah promises in Psalm 94 verses 18 and 19 is being fulfilled.
Jehovah is soothing and comforting each one of his servants, even though many of these servants feel that they have lost everything.
Well, that is just wonderful.
And it really just confirms what we know about the spirit of our brothers.
Ed, our hearts are with you.
Please give our love to all the brothers in Mexico.
We'll be continuing to pray for you and we so much appreciate everything that you're doing for our brothers in that in that land.
And thank you for the interest of the organization and our brothers.
Well, now let's go on to the France branch.
You may know that France looks after several of the islands in the Caribbean.
So we have live with us, brother Patrick De Coupair, who serves on the France branch committee.
Now, Patrick, it's very good to see you as well.
We understand that you have recently been in the Caribbean.
You've just recently come back.
And so could you give us a first hand update of what's actually happening to our brothers there?
As you know, Mark, France branch is taking care of some islands of this area.
Guadeloupe, Martinique, San Bartellini, San Martins.
And since the first hurricane, we're also working very close with Barbados branch committee
in order to support and make a joint efforts of some of the islands that they are also overseer
and that have been affected by the Hurricane Irma.
But the real emergency was the island of San Martins.
There was a need to contact the brothers to provide food, water,
and also to set up a disaster relief,
but most important to bring some spiritual comfort.
So very soon, a group of brothers have been made,
doctors, nurses, some construction servants, and others from the branch.
And this group was able to fly into the islands of San Martins on September 11.
We were some of the first ones to be allowed to enter the island
after the military and the police.
And prior to departure to San Martins,
the branch invited the congregations in Guadeloupe and Martinique
to bring food and water to their assembly halls.
And the first container of food and water was able to leave Guadeloupe on September 10
and to arrive the same day as us on September 11.
So the brothers knew that we were coming as a group from the branch with a container.
So arrangements were made so we can meet at the Kingdom Hall the next day.
And there, Martin, that was something I will never forget
is the day that we have met for the first time our brothers and sisters
and we were able to talk with them to see how they were feeling,
acting, to see their heart for Jehovah and how calms they were and how spiritual.
So we were waiting on for the container to be delivered at the harbor.
But while well thing, everybody decided to clean the Kingdom Hall
and to put it into operation.
So finally, the container was delivered and in less than five hours,
almost ten tons of food and water was distributed.
We were able to bring it to the Kingdom Hall and to deliver it to the friends the same day.
And that was done despite massive distractions on the islands
and many difficulties to move on this island because of lack of transportation.
The next day, some medical attention was given to our friends in the island.
Some shepherding work was started with the elders.
Meetings were conducted with the elders and presided by branch committee members
of both French brands and Barbados branch.
This is how Mark Huffings were started on the island of Saint-Martins.
Well, Patrick, it's just wonderful to hear this.
Not only that you're getting the relief aid out to the brothers,
but that you're also focused on looking after their spiritual needs.
It's so encouraging to hear.
But Patrick, is there something that has been especially encouraging for you
that you might want to share with our brothers?
Well, we have many experiences that one of them,
but truly impressed us very much in our group was the reaction of our brothers and sisters.
How calm they were, how ready they were to move,
and just wait a direction from Jehovah's organization.
I also remember some sisters who were living nearby the kingdom hall.
They saw some activities going on at the kingdom.
Also, they decided to come to help.
And they were so happy to see their brothers and sisters for the first time after the hurricane.
They faces changes.
They were smiling and happy.
We were also very impressed when we talked with the elders
to see how much they have done to help their brothers and sisters.
Despite their own conditions, because some of them lost their homes, their houses,
they took the time, the energy, to visit their friends,
to comfort them and to bring the food.
Really, these elders are a hidden place from the wind and a place of
concealment from the rainstorm, according to Isaiah chapter 32 verse 2.
It was also amazing to see the trust of our brothers and sisters in Jehovah's organization.
Before we leave, one elder told me, we knew Jehovah something would be done by Jehovah.
But we didn't know how, but your visit and the first container was the answer to our prayer.
So many of our brothers and sisters have developed enormous confidants in Jehovah's organization
are very thankful for that.
And if I may, Mark, I would like to share with you one experience.
Yes, please.
Yeah, it's an experience that occurs the first time we went in a service.
Two sisters were visiting a lady, a lady who was studying the Bible with us
and also comes to the meetings on a regular basis.
And while the sisters were visiting this lady, a elder came and gave her some relief food.
So we can imagine how happy the lady was.
That she was not happy for only for her food, but for something more.
And so she explained to the sisters why.
The day before, one of her neighbors told her, but she will never get any help from Jehovah's
witnesses because she was not baptized as one of Jehovah's witnesses.
But she said to her neighbor, Jehovah will not forget me.
And I know this is the true organization so she defended Jehovah's name.
And now with this bag of food in her hand, she could say to her neighbor,
I can testify.
I have seen that Jehovah's witnesses are true Christians.
So that reminds me of this thought found in 2nd Corinthians chapter 1 verse 3,
where we say that Jehovah is a god of comfort, but not only of comfort, a god of tundra
of mercies.
And verse 4 mentions that he also used people to comfort others.
And really this is what happened during that immediate relief need.
Jehovah has used some of our brothers and sisters to comfort others.
And when leaving our brothers and sisters, and you can imagine how hard it was to leave them
on this island, we really had the feeling that Jehovah is taking care of all his servants,
all his servants, even in this remote, tiny islands.
Patrick, thank you so much for that very, very encouraging report.
And also thank you for being willing to make the effort to travel to the Caribbean,
to those islands to visit our brothers and make sure that they're so well cared for.
We wish you Jehovah's blessing, and we're going to be praying for you,
and please pass on our love to all of the brothers that you are looking after.
Many thanks, and this will be done for sure.
Now we're going to go and move on to the United States.
We have a Brother Gary Brow with us from the United States Branch Committee.
Gary, we know that the United States has been hard hit by these disasters.
Can you give us a little bit of an update about what's taking place?
Yes, thank you. I'd be happy to do so.
Hurricane Harvey hit the state of Texas and caused quite a bit of damage, significant damage,
actually. And then there were Hurricane's Irma and Maria, and they did terrible damage in the
Caribbean islands, as well as in Florida and in Georgia. In fact, thus far it's reported that
a total of 184 kingdom halls have been damaged, and over 6,000 homes of the friends have been
damaged. But Mark, I can assure you one thing, that brothers are working 24 hours a day to
be sure there is relief efforts. In fact, so far there are 975 tons of humanitarian supplies that
have been shipped to the various disaster areas, the use of private planes, and even some boats have
been very helpful in this regard. And the United States Branch Committee has appointed disaster
relief committees over these various areas, and also relief centers have been identified.
Now in Texas there are seven functioning in Florida. We have four relief centers in Puerto Rico,
because of the tremendous damage there. We have nine relief centers, and in the Virgin Islands
there are five, one for each of the islands that have been affected. Now there are hundreds of
brothers working in these relief centers right now. Soon there's going to be thousands working
from these centers. You know, it's just amazing, Gary, to hear what you've accomplished in such a
short time to, you know, mobilize everyone and get these relief centers set up. It's just wonderful
to hear that. But now I also understand that you just recently went to the Caribbean to actually
visit the brothers and see what's happening. Can you tell us a little bit about what you saw?
Yes, that was the brother that owns a plane. He's a pilot, and another pilot was with him that
picked out four of us in Florida, and we flew down to Puerto Rico. Then from Puerto Rico, with
this small plane, we were able to go to St. Thomas, get into St. Croix, Tartola, and then with a boat,
get over into the island of St. John. And it was heartwarming to make these trips because when we
would get on the island, there would be many brothers and sisters there to receive us. And
these friends, Mark, have gone through some very difficult times. And there's situations
right now, in some cases, is really critical. But you could see the pain in their eyes
and on their faces. But they had big smiles every one of them. They were so happy to see
brothers that come to them that was giving them hope that help is going to be there.
In fact, you remind me of the Apostle Paul when he was on the way to Rome. In fact, they were
taking him to prison. And about 46 miles before he got into Rome, there was a group of brothers
that put forth great effort to be there to greet him. And then 10 miles further, there's another
group that put effort to meet him. And here's what the result of it was Acts 28, 15 says,
on catching sight of them, Paul thanked God and took courage. I really feel these visits
accomplished the same thing for these dear friends to encourage them to carry on.
Absolutely. Thank you so much for being willing to go. And we wish we could have been with you
on that trip. But I wonder, we were just hungry to know a little bit more. Could you tell us
maybe about one of the stops that you made and what you actually saw while you were with the
brothers? Yeah, there are so many heartwarming experiences. One was on the island of Tartola.
They have one kingdom hall that serves the four congregations. And it's been the center of
worship there for decades. But it was demolished by the winds. It just did great damage on the kingdom
hall. In fact, it's unsafe to enter. This kingdom hall has been a wonderful place to bring people
together to search a whole of God. But now tell you what's happening. Many of the friends will come
to the kingdom hall and they'll sit in the parking lot all day long and in the afternoon before
curfew they go back to their homes. Now, why are they doing that? Well, they have full trust that
Jehovah's organization is going to provide assistance for them and it will probably start right at
the kingdom hall. Now, we were really touched by this and it was apparent that we needed to do
something. So steps are underway already to repair the kingdom halls. So those brothers and sisters
will have a place for their worship. It also will serve as a relief center for the area.
That's absolutely wonderful. Gary, I know you're just filled with experiences. There's so much
that you could tell us. But just before we conclude, is there something else that you could share
with us? Well, the living conditions are very difficult on the islands. The brothers
and sisters are doing a wonderful job supporting one another. There's in many cases
very little food and water, no running water in many places. But they're coming together and they're
assisting one another until the supplies arrive. There's also something that's really touched me
and that's the work that the circuit of this year has been doing in connection with all of the
disasters. These brothers really are involved in a relief ministry now and it's heartwarming to
see their resolve to stay with their circuits during these hurricanes and to be there to provide
spiritual assistance immediately afterwards and also to be on hand to work with the elders to
provide a relief also. I'd like to tell you a little bit about Puerto Rico. When we arrived there,
we wanted to meet with all of the circuit of this year. There are 19 of them. But there's very little
communication. The phones are down, no electricity, of course. But we worked hard to try to get a
message the best way we can that we could to the circuit of this year's. Really, we thought maybe
three or four would show up. Believe it or not, 13 were able to make their way to the facility there
in Puerto Rico. It was touching to be with them, watching their love and their determination to
stay in their assignments and to work along with the disaster relief committees and the
elders in their congregation in their circuits. We really encouraged the brothers.
Remember Hebrews 111. Help the brothers to maintain their faith and don't allow the circumstances
around them to weaken their faith because that will, that faith produces hope. And these dear ones
have full hope in Jehovah's organization that they will provide, we will provide the assistance for
them. That meeting, I will say, was quite electric. It was a parent Jehovah's Holy Spirit was there
with all of these brothers. And you could see the brothers were resolved to stay in their assignments,
to work along with the relief committees and to work along with the elders in their various
circuits. And as a result of that, and knowing the backing of the branch committee,
we feel the brothers there are in good hands. Jehovah's going to take care of them.
We encourage them to continue putting forth their great effort. And we know Jehovah's going to
bless them as he has up to this point. In fact, we know there's going to need an army of workers
mark to accomplish what has to be done. The brothers also have contributed financially and that's
really beautiful to see. In fact, just recently, over 200 generators have been donated for the
brothers down there. In addition to our financial support and those that have the physical energy that
can do the manual labor, we can all keep these dear brothers and sisters in our prayers.
You know, Gary, just hearing your report, it's amazing to consider how much of the branch
territory has been affected. And yet, it's amazing to see how well organized you are,
and that you're getting the help out to the brothers right away. And I think what stood out in
what you said to me is the faith that our brothers in spite of the fact they're going through this
difficult time, they're keeping their faith strong and that the brothers are caring for their
spiritual needs. And thank you so much for that report. And thank you for being willing to go
and visit the brothers. Please convey our love to them and let them know that we're continuing to
pray for them. Thank you for the privilege and we certainly will.
Well, finally, we'd like to speak with a brother from the coordinators committee,
Brother Bram Siegel, who works in the coordinators committee office. Brother Siegel also visited the
Caribbean with Brother Bro. Now, Bram, we're so grateful that you were willing to make that trip.
Can you give us a little bit of information about what you saw and what your impressions were?
Yes, even though our visits were brief, it was very encouraging just to get to be with the
brothers and sisters in Puerto Rico and St. Thomas and St. John. And you know, as we hear about
different disasters that occur around the world, we all pray for one another. And I must say just
being able to be there and meet the friends, the brothers and sisters there, to hear their stories
firsthand, to cry with them. It was just very encouraging. It was really just such a privilege to
be there with them. When we arrived to Puerto Rico on our way to the Bethel facility, there were
trees that were down on the streets, debris in the roads. In fact, I recall when we got off
the exit at one point, the traffic was actually coming our way because they couldn't cross
in view of the debris. When we got to the Bethel there, there were trees that were strewn about
in fact, as we pulled up to Bethel, there was a commercial car wash that had been blown into the
gates of Bethel. But by the time, just a few days later, when we were leaving, the Bethel family
had worked really hard. They were cleaning up the property and from the outside, it was as if
the hurricane hadn't had done much damage after all. It really worked hard. When we went to the
island of St. Thomas, we were able to go to one of the kingdom halls there. It was on the weekend,
so congregation meetings were coming and going and beginning and ending. When we arrived,
the brothers and sisters had set up a little table with signs. One was saying a rooming this way
and damage that way. They were organizing the brothers and sisters, just trying to see what did
they need? How could they be helped? What was really encouraging to me was regarding the rooming,
it was not just for the brothers and sisters who had been displaced locally, but it was also because
they had confidence. They had faith that Jehovah's organization would be coming, brothers would
be coming to help with reconstruction and they wanted to be prepared so that they could respond
in their own way. It was just so faith-strengthening. We asked some of the friends about it,
why did they do that? How did they know that help was coming? One sister said, we know that Jehovah
will take care of us and just had that faith, that confidence. It was very encouraging.
From there, we were able to take a ferry to St. John, the island there, and meet with the
brothers. They had such a warm spirit. As some of the other brothers mentioned, even though they're
dealing with a lot individually, they are still interested in caring for one another,
pooling together funds for fuel or even what food they had they're sharing together
until more supplies can come. It was just so encouraging to see that family atmosphere,
that spirit that they were showing toward one another. Really, that's what stood out to me the most
in visiting the brothers and sisters in these different areas. They were not so focused on
themselves. They were still very interested in their brothers and sisters. Even beyond the island
they were on, but around the earth. In fact, when we went to Puerto Rico, they were asking,
how are the brothers in St. John doing? Have you heard from them? When we were in St. John,
they're asking likewise, how are the brothers in Puerto Rico doing? They were really focused on
caring for one another. It brought to mind the scripture of 1 Corinthians 12 verses 25 and 26.
They have that mutual concern for one another. If one member of the body suffers,
all the members suffer with it and they were just really beautifully showing their love and
faith in action. That's a wonderful report, Bram. Thank you so much for going and for bringing
back so many of those encouraging thoughts. But now, something that many of the brothers have
been asking about is our brothers in Cuba. We've heard about some of the other islands, but what's
happening with our brothers in Cuba? How are they doing? Yes, we received a report from the
branch in Cuba after Hurricane Irma came across the island and we're happy to report there were
no brothers that died or were injured. In fact, many had evacuated to the homes of other brothers
or even to government shelters as needed in order to be in a safer location. The Bethel family,
the facility there, they're doing fine. There wasn't any damage or injury there. As far as the
property or homes of the brothers, there was quite extensive damage. Over 650 houses had major
damage and over 50 were completely destroyed. There's a great need in Cuba as well. We know that
getting supplies to the different islands can be challenging, including in Cuba, but the brothers
are working hard to provide for them and getting supplies to them. We know that Jehovah is going to
continue to bless the relief efforts that are being done and we continue to pray for all of our
brothers around the world. Yes, we do. Thank you so much, Bram. Please give our love to all of the
brothers and please let them know that we're praying on their behalf. Our privilege, thank you.
In the midst of these major disasters, it's truly amazing to see how Jehovah's people are all
rallying together to help one another. The phones have been ringing at branches all over the world.
The brothers are calling. They're asking, what can we do to help? It's a wonderful spirit.
Well, of course, those near the disaster areas have donated food, water, clothing, generators.
It's just faith strengthening to see the brothers coming to the aid of one another.
But we're also able to tell you today and we're very happy to do so that already some three
million dollars have been sent from your generous contributions in order to care for the
immediate needs of our brothers in these various areas. However, this is just the beginning.
The governing body believes that we will need to spend an additional 20 to 25 million dollars
in order to help the brothers recover from these disasters. Well, many are saying, we're not
close enough to donate water and food and so on. And they want to know, what can we do?
Well, brothers and sisters, we can all help by making a donation to the worldwide work
using the contribution box at our own kingdom hall. Or we can even make a donation via the JW.org
website. But most important, we can all pray on behalf of our brothers. Now, sometimes we hear our
brothers say, I can't do that much. All I can do is pray. But in reality, prayer is not a small
thing. It is the greatest thing we can do because we have confidence that Jehovah hears the prayers
of righteous ones. We know that our brothers in these disaster regions are going through a very
difficult time. But what is our confidence? Well, it's really what stated here in Psalm 46 and
verse 1. It says, God is our refuge and strength, a hope that is readily found in times of distress.
That is why we will not fear, though the earth undergoes change, though the mountains topple
into the depths of the sea, though its waters roar and foam over, though the mountains rock
on account of its turbulence. And then verse 5. God is in the city. It cannot be overthrown. God will
come to its aid at the break of dawn. Jehovah will certainly take care of our brothers. He is our
refuge and strength. We have no reason to be afraid. He is a help that is easily found in times of
distress. You can be confident that the governing body will continue to do everything in our power
to provide the needed relief aid to our dear brothers in these affected areas. We love you very
much and thank you for tuning in for this update. This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters
of Jehovah's Witnesses.